BASIC RIGHTS OF MENTALLY ILL PATIENTS AND NURSE'S RESPONSIBILITIES.

Chapter VIII of Mental Health Act 1987 contains a very novel and explicit provision of protection of human rights. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) in Article 24(1) explicitly mentions, "Every one has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services." Article 5 of UDHR states no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Article 66(1) of Persons with Disability Act states, "The appropriate government and the local authorities shall within the limits of their economic capacity and development undertake or cause to be undertaken rehabilitation of all persons with disabilities." Mental illness is also recognized as disability according to section 2 of the Person with Disability (PWD) Act 1995.

Patient Self-determination Act-Patient Rights.

1.The right to appropriate treatment and related services in 5. w setting and under conditions that are the most support- ive of such person's personal liberty and restrict such lib- erty only to the extent necessary consistent with such person's treatment needs, applicable requirements of law and applicable judicial law and order.

2. The right to an individualized, written treatment or service sence of informed, voluntary, written consent (includes plan (such plan to be developed promptly after admission of such person), the right to treatment based on such plan, the right to periodic review and reassessment of treatment and related service needs, and the right to appropriate revision of such plan, including any revision necessary to provide a description of mental health serv- ices that may be needed after such person is discharged from such program or facility.

3. The right to ongoing participation, in a manner appropriate to a person's capabilities, in the planning of mental health services to be provided (including the right to participate in the development and periodic revision of the plan).

4. The right to be provided with a reasonable explanation in terms and language appropriate to a person's condition and ability to understand the person's general mental and physical (if appropriate) condition, the objectives of treat ment, the nature and significant possible adverse effects of recommended treatment, the reasons why a particular treatment is considered  appropriate, and reasons why access to certain visitors may not be appropriate, and any appropriate and available alternative treatments, services, and types of providers of mental health services.

5. The right not to receive a mode or course of treatment in the absence of informed, voluntary, written consent to treatment except during an emergency situation or as permitted by law when the person is being treated as a result of court order .

6. The right not to participate in experimentation in the absence of informed, voluntary, written consent (includes human subject protection).

7. The right to freedom from restraint or seclusion, other than as a mode or course of treatment or restraint or seclusion during an emergency situation with a written order by a responsible mental health professional.

8. The right to a humane treatment environment that affords reasonable protection from harm and appropriate privacy with regard to personal needs.

9. The right to access, on request, to such person's mental health-care records.

10. The right, in the case of a person admitted on a resi- dential or inpatient care basis, to converse with others privately, to have convenient and reasonable access to the telephone and mail, and to see visitors during regularly scheduled hours. (For treatment purposes, specific individuals may be excluded.

11. The right to be informed promptly and in writing at the time of admission of these rights.

12. The right to assert grievances with respect to infringement of this rights

13. The right to exercise these rights without repirsal.

14. The right of referral to other providers upon discharge.




Some of the rights of psychiatric patient.

The right to wear their own clothes.
The right to have individual storage space for their private use.
The right to keep and use their own personal possessions.
The right to spend a sum of their money for their own expenses.
The right to have reasonable access to all communication media like telephone, letter writing and mailing.
The right to see visitors everyday
The right to treatment in the least restricted setting.
The right to hold civil service status.
The right to refuse electroconvulsive therapy.
The right to manage and dispose of property and execute wills.


Nurse's Implications for Protecting Patient's Rights.

Psychiatric patients are often the least capable of protecting their own rights. It is, therefore, one of the responsibilities of the nurse to guide the patients and relatives in matters related to their rights and protect the patient from any mistreatment.

To protect patient's rights, the nurse should be aware of these rights in the first place. 
She should ensure that ward procedures and policies should not violate patient's rights.

Discussing these rights with the mental health team and including these rights in the nursing care plan is all part of her responsibility in protecting the patient's rights.